We'll continue our discussion
of Java Streams Internals
by describing the
execution of streams.
And we have to be aware here of
how a Java stream is actually
executed after that linked
list is built up at runtime.
What happens when things
actually start to run?
So when the terminal
operation finally runs,
then the streams framework picks
a so-called execution plan.
And the execution plan
that will be selected
by the streams
framework is obviously
going to be based on
properties of the source
and aggregate operations.
So all those flags that
we just talked about,
and the accumulation
of the flags
to create derive flags at
each of the different stages
in the stream pipeline.
Now, it turns out that the
intermediate and terminal
operations are actually split
up into different categories,
depending on their properties.
We'll start by talking about the
intermediate operations first.
Intermediate operations are
divided up into two categories,
based on whether they're
stateless or stateful.
If you recall, we kind
of described these things
earlier in the weeks.
So stateless operations,
which would include things
like filter, map, and
flat map and so on,
those will be able to be run--
if we only have intermediate
operations that are stateless,
then all of a
stateless operations
can be run in a single pass,
starting from when the terminal
operation is hit.
And it'll just pull the data
from the source, all the way
through all those operations.
And then it's done,
it'll go ahead
and accumulate it into whatever
the terminal operation needs
to do to get its job done.
So this works, this one
passed behavior is in effect
even if the stream is parallel.
So that allows very
high performance
of a parallel stream because
all these operations are ideally
stateless, an
embarrassingly parallel,
and they don't have any
dependencies on each other,
and they don't acquire locks,
and so on and so forth.
And as a result, things
will be very efficient.
In contrast, if there
are stateful operations
in a stream, such as sorted,
limit, distinct, dropWhile,
and so on, then that
requires the stream
to be divided up into sections
and run in multiple passes.
Just to think about
a simple example,
if you want to sort the contents
of a stream you can't do that
in one pass by pulling the data
element from the data source
all the way through to
the terminal operation
because you've got to
store all of the elements
in some intermediate buffer,
the stream framework, rather,
has to store all the elements
in some intermediate buffer,
and then only run the
sort on it after it's
accumulated all of them,
because otherwise you
would get some bizarre output.
So if they're
stateful operations,
that requires a
different execution plan,
and that goes back to
what I said earlier
where I noted that if you
have stateful operations,
chances are you'll take
more time and space
overhead to do the processing.
Likewise, terminal
operations are also
divided into two categories.
We have run to
completion operations,
and we also have the
short circuit operations.
So the run to
completion operations
includes sort of that, the
classic terminal operations,
things like reduce, things like
collect, things like for each,
and so on.
And these terminal operations
process the data efficiently
in bulk using a split
trader method called
for each remaining,
which goes ahead
and applies an action
to every element
that's in the spliterator
at that point.
Conversely, there is also short
circuiting terminal operations,
things like anyMatch,
findFirst noneMatch, and so on.
And these stop as soon as
the condition that they're
trying to satisfy is
either met or not met,
depending on which way
they're trying to go.
These terminal
operations process
data one element at a time,
using the tri advanced method
of spliterator.
So of course, every
time you call it,
it's going to tell you
whether you should keep going.
And when you're done,
then you stop right away.
So they're short circuit.
They don't run in bulk or in
mass using for each remaining
spliterator method, but
instead, they execute one
at a time using try advance.
So those are the
main differences
between the characteristics of
both the data source and then
the various
intermediate operations,
and how they're divided up into
these different categories.
Stateful and stateless for
intermediate operations,
and run to completion and short
circuiting for the terminal
operations.